# Enumerator


.TH AZURE_TERRAFORM_SETUP 1 "December 2024" "1.0" "Azure and Terraform Setup Manual"
.SH NAME
azure_terraform_setup \- Set up your Azure and Terraform environment

.SH SYNOPSIS
azure_terraform_setup

.SH DESCRIPTION
Setting up an Azure and Terraform environment involves several steps, including creating an Azure account, installing Terraform, and configuring your environment. Below are specific instructions to help you get started.

.SH STEPS

.TP
.B Step 1: Create an Azure Account
1. Sign Up for Azure:
   - Go to the Azure Free Account page: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/free/.
   - Click on "Start free" and follow the prompts to create your account. You may need to provide a credit card for verification, but you won't be charged for using free services.

.TP
.B Step 2: Install Terraform
1. Download Terraform:
   - Go to the Terraform downloads page: https://www.terraform.io/downloads.html.
   - Download the appropriate package for your operating system (Windows, macOS, or Linux).

2. Install Terraform:
   - Windows: Unzip the downloaded file and move the `terraform.exe` to a directory included in your system's PATH (e.g., `C:\Program Files\Terraform`).
   - macOS: Use Homebrew to install Terraform:
     .B
     brew tap hashicorp/tap
     brew install hashicorp/tap/terraform
     .B
   - Linux: Unzip the downloaded file and move the `terraform` binary to `/usr/local/bin`:
     .B
     unzip terraform_*.zip
     sudo mv terraform /usr/local/bin/

3. Verify Installation:
   - Open a terminal or command prompt and run:
     .B
     terraform -version
   - This should display the installed version of Terraform.

.TP
.B Step 3: Configure Azure CLI
1. Install Azure CLI:
   - Follow the instructions on the Azure CLI installation page: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli for your operating system.

2. Log in to Azure:
   - Open a terminal and run:
     .B
     az login
   - This will open a web browser for you to log in to your Azure account. After logging in, you will see a list of your subscriptions.

.TP
.B Step 4: Set Up Your Terraform Project
1. Create a Directory for Your Project:
   .B
   mkdir my-terraform-project
   cd my-terraform-project

2. Create a Terraform Configuration File:
   - Create a file named `main.tf` in your project directory. This file will contain your Terraform configuration. Here’s a simple example to create an Azure resource group:
   .B
   provider "azurerm" {
     features {}
   }

   resource "azurerm_resource_group" "example" {
     name     = "example-resources"
     location = "East US"
   }

.TP
.B Step 5: Initialize Terraform
1. Initialize the Terraform Project:
   - Run the following command in your project directory:
     .B
     terraform init

.TP
.B Step 6: Plan and Apply Your Configuration
1. Create an Execution Plan:
   - Run the following command to see what actions Terraform will take:
     .B
     terraform plan

2. Apply the Configuration:
   - To create the resources defined in your configuration, run:
     .B
     terraform apply
   - Type `yes` when prompted to confirm the action.

.TP
.B Step 7: Verify Resources in Azure
- Go to the Azure Portal: https://portal.azure.com/ and navigate to "Resource groups" to see the newly created resource group.

.TP
.B Step 8: Clean Up Resources
- To remove the resources created by Terraform, run:
   .B
   terraform destroy
- Type `yes` when prompted to confirm the destruction of resources.

.SH USAGE
- Infrastructure as Code: Terraform allows you to define your infrastructure in code, making it easy to version, share, and manage.
- Automation: Automate the provisioning and management of Azure resources.
- Multi-Cloud Support: Terraform can manage resources across multiple cloud providers, not just Azure.

.SH EXAMPLES
By following these steps, you should have a basic Azure and Terraform environment set up and ready for use. You can expand your Terraform configurations to include more complex resources and architectures as needed.
