.TH GITHUB-ACTIONS 1 "December 2024" "GitHub Actions Documentation"
.SH NAME
README \- GitHub Actions Overview

.SH DESCRIPTION
GitHub Actions is a powerful feature of GitHub that allows you to automate workflows directly within your GitHub repository. It enables Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Deployment (CD) by allowing you to create custom workflows that can be triggered by various events in your repository.

.SH KEY FEATURES
.IP 1. **Event-Driven Workflows**: Workflows can be triggered by various events, such as:
.IP 2. Push events to branches
.IP 3. Pull requests
.IP 4. Issues being opened or closed
.IP 5. Scheduled events (cron jobs)
.IP 6. Webhooks from external services

.IP 2. **YAML Configuration**: Workflows are defined in YAML files, making them easy to read and maintain. These files are typically stored in the `.github/workflows` directory of your repository.

.IP 3. **Reusable Actions**: You can create your own actions or use actions created by the community. Actions can be shared and reused across different workflows and repositories.

.IP 4. **Matrix Builds**: GitHub Actions supports matrix builds, allowing you to run tests across multiple versions of a language or different operating systems in parallel.

.IP 5. **Secrets Management**: You can securely store and manage sensitive information, such as API keys and tokens, using GitHub Secrets.

.IP 6. **Integration with GitHub Ecosystem**: GitHub Actions integrates seamlessly with other GitHub features, such as issues, pull requests, and GitHub Packages.

.SH COMPONENTS OF GITHUB ACTIONS
.IP 1. **Workflows**: A workflow is a configurable automated process made up of one or more jobs. Workflows are defined in YAML files.

.IP 2. **Jobs**: A job is a set of steps that execute on the same runner. Jobs can run sequentially or in parallel.

.IP 3. **Steps**: Steps are individual tasks that can run commands, use actions, or execute scripts. Each step can be a shell command or an action.

.IP 4. **Actions**: Actions are reusable units of code that can be combined to create workflows. They can be created by you or sourced from the GitHub Marketplace.

.IP 5. **Runners**: Runners are servers that execute your workflows. GitHub provides hosted runners, or you can set up self-hosted runners.

.SH GETTING STARTED WITH GITHUB ACTIONS
.IP 1. **Create a Workflow File**:
.IP 2. In your repository, create a directory called `.github/workflows`.
.IP 3. Create a new YAML file (e.g., `ci.yml`) in that directory.

.IP 2. **Define the Workflow**:
Here’s an example of a workflow that uses a matrix strategy to run tests in the `teats/` directory across multiple operating systems and Node.js versions:

.B YAML
.nf
name: CI

on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main
  pull_request:
    branches:
      - main

jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ${{ matrix.os }}

    strategy:
      matrix:
        os: [ubuntu-latest, windows-latest, macos-latest]
        node-version: [14, 16, 23]  # You can specify multiple Node.js versions

    steps:
      - name: Checkout code
        uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - name: Set up Node.js
       
        uses: actions/setup-node@v4
        with:
          node-version: ${{ matrix.node-version }}

      - name: Install dependencies
        run: npm install
        working-directory: ./  # Change to the root directory

      - name: Run tests
        run: npm test
        working-directory: ./tests  # Change to the tests directory
.fi

.IP 3. **Commit and Push**:
.IP 2. Commit your changes and push them to your repository. The workflow will automatically trigger based on the defined events.

.IP 4. **Monitor Workflow Runs**:
.IP 2. You can monitor the status of your workflows in the "Actions" tab of your GitHub repository. Here, you can see the logs, successes, and failures of each run.

.SH DIRECTORY STRUCTURE
Your repository should look something like this:

.nf
your-repo/
├── .github/
│   └── workflows/
│       └── ci.yml
├── src/
│   └── (your source code)
├── tests/
│   └── (your test files)
├── package.json
└── (other project files)
.fi

The `src/` directory is used to organize the main source code of the application. It helps keep the project structured by separating the source code from other files, such as configuration files, documentation, and tests. This modular approach encourages clarity and maintainability, making it easier for developers to navigate the codebase.

Additionally, many build tools and task runners are configured to look for source files in the `src/` directory, allowing for a clear distinction between source files and output files (like compiled code or bundled assets).

The `tests/` directory is typically used to organize and store test files. Here’s a breakdown of its purpose:

.IP 1. **Separation of Concerns**: The `tests/` directory helps separate test code from the main application code. This organization makes it easier to manage and maintain both the application and its tests.

.IP 2. **Test Organization**: It allows developers to group related tests together. For example, you might have subdirectories within `tests/` for different modules or features of your application, making it easier to locate and run specific tests.

.IP 3. **Automated Testing**: Many testing frameworks and tools (like Jest, Mocha, or Jasmine) are configured to look for test files in a specific directory, often named `tests/` or `__tests__/`. This convention allows for easy integration with Continuous Integration (CI) systems, which can automatically run tests when code changes are made.

.IP 4. **Test Types**: The `tests/` directory can contain various types of tests, including:
.IP 5. **Unit Tests**: Tests that verify the functionality of individual components or functions in isolation.
.IP 6. **Integration Tests**: Tests that check how different components work together.
.IP 7. **End-to-End Tests**: Tests that simulate user interactions with the application to ensure that the entire system works as expected.

.IP 5. **Documentation**: Having a dedicated `tests/` directory can serve as documentation for the project, indicating which parts of the application are covered by tests and how they are structured.

.IP 6. **Ease of Running Tests**: By keeping tests in a dedicated directory, developers can easily run all tests at once or target specific tests without having to sift through the application code.

The `package.json` file is a crucial part of Node.js and JavaScript projects that serves several important purposes:

.IP 1. **Project Metadata**: `package.json` contains metadata about the project, including the project name, version, description, author, license, and more. This information is useful for both developers and users of the package.

.IP 2. **Dependencies Management**: The file lists the dependencies required for the project to run. These dependencies are specified under the `dependencies` and `devDependencies` sections:
.IP 3. **dependencies**: Packages that are required for the application to run in production.
.IP 4. **devDependencies**: Packages that are only needed for development and testing (e.g., testing frameworks, build tools).

.IP 3. **Scripts**: `package.json` allows you to define scripts that can be run using the npm (Node Package Manager) command. For example, you can define scripts for starting the application, running tests, building the project, and more. These scripts can be executed with commands like `npm run <script-name>`.

.IP 4. **Versioning**: The file helps manage the versioning of the project and its dependencies. It specifies the version of the project itself and can also define version ranges for dependencies, allowing for flexibility in updates.

.IP 5. **Configuration**: Some packages allow you to specify configuration options directly in `package.json`, making it easier to manage settings for various tools and libraries used in the project.

.IP 6. **Publishing**: If you are creating a package to be shared with others (e.g., on npm), `package.json` is essential for publishing. It provides the necessary information for npm to understand how to install and use your package.

.IP 7. **Compatibility**: The file can also specify the Node.js version required to run the project, ensuring that users have the correct environment set up.

.SH EXAMPLE OF A `package.json` FILE
Here’s a simple example of what a `package.json` file might look like:

.nf
{
  "name": "my-project",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "A simple project to demonstrate package.json",
  "main": "index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "start": "node index.js",
    "test": "jest"
  },
  "dependencies": {
    "express": "^4.17.1"
  },
  "devDependencies": {
    "jest": "^26.6.0"
  },
  "author": "Your Name",
  "license": "MIT"
}
.fi

In this example:
.IP 1. The project is named "my-project" and is at version "1.0.0".
.IP 2. It includes a description and specifies the main entry point of the application.
.IP 3. The `scripts` section defines commands for starting the application and running tests.
.IP 4. The `dependencies` and `devDependencies` sections list the required packages for the project.

.SH CONCLUSION
GitHub Actions provides a powerful and flexible framework for automating workflows within your software development projects. By leveraging its features, you can streamline your Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Deployment (CD) processes, ensuring that your code is tested and deployed efficiently.

A well-organized project structure, including dedicated `src/` and `tests/` directories, enhances maintainability and collaboration among team members. The `src/` directory serves as the home for your application's source code, promoting clarity and separation from other project files. Meanwhile, the `tests/` directory allows for effective organization of your test cases, facilitating automated testing and ensuring that your application functions as intended.

The `package.json` file is a critical component of Node.js projects, providing essential metadata, managing dependencies, and defining scripts for various tasks. It plays a vital role in the development workflow, allowing for easy installation of packages and execution of scripts, while also ensuring that your project is compatible with the required Node.js environment.

By following these best practices and utilizing the tools provided by GitHub Actions and Node.js, you can create robust, maintainable, and efficient software projects that are well-prepared for collaboration and deployment.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Patrick Connor Adams (thaumaturgists).
